Hi, everybody.
Hopefully,
you're having a good time so far.
I'm Jim Batson.
And for those of you watching at home,
I'm the one with the full head of hair.
OK.
Today we're going to be talking to you
about AirPlay and external displays.
And first thing we're going to
cover is how to create a great
AirPlay experience for your application.
And then we're going to be covering
Some specific things about video
because there are some nuances there.
And finally,
we'll be talking about taking
advantage of multiple displays so
that you can create an immersive
environment for your application.
So starting with AirPlay.
We released AirPlay for iOS last fall.
And since then,
we've been working a whole lot,
been adding a whole bunch of stuff.
Now, AirPlay is a family of technologies
and user experiences that basically
have one big goal in mind.
That's the ability to
share the experience
[Transcript missing]
With AirPlay Audio,
you have the ability to share your
audio stream from your phone or iPad
or iPod Touch straight to an Apple TV.
Now, if you-- and this works for
all audio on your system.
But if you are an
application that has music,
You can make your app really shine by
sending additional information that will
be displayed on the AirPlay receiver.
Now,
AirPlay audio is not just for Apple TV.
There's a whole host of devices that are
coming out from third-party companies
that have AirPlay compatible devices,
AirPlay compatible receivers,
and dockable speakers
and other accessories.
So there's going to be more and more
places your AirPlay audio can play.
Now on to video.
With AirPlay Video,
the video content itself is
streamed directly to the Apple TV.
So that means there's no
degradation in quality and you
get the best viewing experience.
And you get to take advantage
of the whole screen.
But one of the great features
of AirPlay Video is that while
you're watching the video,
You can also do multitasking.
And so you can do other things while
people in the room are watching.
So they're checking out your gnarly
moves and you still can surf the web
and buy stuff for your dad because,
you know, it's Father's Day and
less than two weeks away.
Now, before we go to AirPlay Screen and
AirPlay Mirroring,
let's talk a little bit about the iPad 2.
When the iPad 2 was released,
we introduced a feature
called Mirroring for that.
And that's accomplished by plugging
in the Apple Digital AV adapter
into your iPad and hooking it
up to a TV that supports HDMI.
When you do that plug-in, the screen will
automatically be mirrored.
And with iOS 5, with AirPlay mirroring,
you've got the same capability
but without the wire.
So the live audio and the live graphics
are sent to an Apple TV wirelessly,
and you get the same behavior
as you did with a cable,
namely that when you first connect,
you're mirrored.
And this works great for collaboration.
You can imagine working on slides with
some other people on the big screen while
you're manipulating them on the pad.
But since it's based on the same
technology as the cable case,
you've got the support
for second display.
Which really works great
for things like Keynote,
where it has its independent content,
something different from the iPad screen.
But it's not just great
for presentations.
It's also great for things like
games and other applications.
You've got the opportunity here to
create applications that go beyond
just using it on a single display.
So you have opportunities to kind
of create a new user experience.
So you should look into that.
So how do you as a developer
take advantage of AirPlay?
Well, there is no AirPlay framework.
AirPlay is implemented
throughout the system,
integrated in all the frameworks and
technologies you're already using.
So let's go take a closer
look at what you might do.
We're going to take a look at
increasing the AirPlay experience.
We're going to cover a little
bit about media routing.
about the AirPlay UI.
Showing extra information for the user.
Accepting remote controls from
the AirPlay device and adding
multitasking to your apps.
Let's start with media routing.
Now, media routing on the system
solves the basic problem that
when you're playing media,
you want the audio and the video
to go where the user wants.
Now, with physical devices,
that's pretty easy.
When you plug in some headphones,
It's a physical gesture.
So you know the user wants the
audio to go to the headphones.
When they plug in an HDMI adapter,
they want the audio and
video to go out through the
HDMI adapter to the television.
But what if there's a TV available,
an Apple TV?
There's no physical
connection that can be made.
So instead,
the user finds the AirPlay route picker,
uses it and selects the
Apple TV as a destination,
and then the audio and video
will go to the Apple TV now.
So while we're on the
topic of media routing,
let's talk about audio routing behaviors.
Now, when your application makes
sounds and plays audio,
typically the audio you make is
about your application experience.
There's ambient sounds or media playback.
But there's another class of sounds
which are about direct user feedback,
things like key clicks or alerts.
Now, with iOS 5,
when you're using AirPlay,
the application audio is
going to go to the Apple TV.
But the system sounds are now
going to come from the device.
So that's where the user is touching.
That's where you want
key clicks to happen.
So it's really important to
use system sound APIs for
playing system sounds only.
You don't want your audio that's
intended to go with your content to
be playing locally when it should
be playing on the remote device.
So some of you have been using system
sound APIs because they're easy to use
and they're convenient for these small,
short sounds.
There's a lot of choices,
but let me just point you to one of them,
AV Audio Player.
With AV Audio Player, it's pretty simple.
You just create an
AV Audio Player using a file
URL pointing to your audio content.
And then with a few controls,
a few playback commands,
you can play that sound inside your app.
So check that out.
Now I'm back to the route picker.
I'm going to talk a little details
about how the user interacts.
So there's the system AirPlay Picker,
which is available through the
multitasking user interface.
It's always available.
The user just double
taps the menu button,
swipes right,
and reveals these media controls.
Now, if there's an AirPlay compatible
device available,
You get an AirPlay button
that will appear.
And then when the user clicks on that,
they get a list.
And they can choose the Apple TV.
Now,
if the Apple TV is the destination device
and if the Apple TV is running iOS 5,
mirroring is an option.
So that'll appear and
they can just slide that.
You saw that yesterday to
invoke AirPlay mirroring.
So keep in mind that the system route
AirPlay Picker is always available.
Even though your app's in the front most,
the user can always get
there and change the route.
Just be aware of that.
Now, for media-based applications,
it's really convenient
to have an AirPlay picker
inside your application UI.
You don't want the user to have
to change their focus from your
application to direct the content
to wherever they want to play.
So how do you go about adding
an AirPlay picker to your UI?
It's really easy.
Just use MPVolumeView.
You just create a volume view and just
add it as a subview to one of your views.
Then you can place it around.
So the default is that you get the volume
slider as well as the route picker.
But if you want the picker only,
it's really easy.
You just set show as volume slider to no.
And then you just get the picker element.
Now keep in mind,
if there's no device available,
the picker is not visible.
But now you've got the ability to place
that wherever you want in your UI.
So once you're routing media content
from the device to the AirPlay receiver,
you want to enhance that
experience on that receiver.
And you can do that because if you
don't do any extra coding yourself,
there's nothing we can do.
There's just no information
for us to display there.
But with iOS 5,
you as an application have the
ability to send metadata over that
will be displayed on the Apple TV.
So you use MPNow Playing Info Center,
and it's part of the
Media Player Framework.
And it works with any playback framework
you're using to play your content.
And it's really simple to use.
You just call setNowPlayingInfo with
a dictionary of the metadata that
you want associated with a song.
What kind of metadata?
Well, besides the standard
strings of like song name,
artist, album title, things like that,
you have the ability
to send artwork over.
And that kind of really
enriches the experience.
Now, besides the static information,
you can also have dynamic
information that updates the
progress bar visible on the TV.
You've got playback rate, duration,
and elapsed time.
Now, it's important to give an
accurate playback rate.
The reason is that the progress
bar is updated on the device.
By interpolating those values so you
don't have to keep hitting it with,
now is the elapsed time,
now is the elapsed time.
So you don't want to do
that because that'll just
unnecessarily send lots of data.
Now that you've gotten extra
information going to the device
being displayed on the Apple TV or
on an AirPlay compatible receiver,
you want to be able to handle events
coming from the remote device.
That allows your user to control
the media playback using the
remote control from your Apple TV.
And it's not just for Apple TV.
These same APIs work with
a host of other devices.
The example here is that the headphones--
you've got the remote control clicker--
So if you support these APIs,
those will control the media
playback as well as the lock screen.
And then there's a host of accessories
that also support remote controls.
So what do you need to do to
actually support remote controls?
Well,
the first thing you have to do is the
application has to ask to receive them,
these remote control events.
First thing you do is you have
to become a first responder.
And you do that by first overriding
the can become first responder
method and returning yes.
So the system knows you
can be in that situation.
In your view, did the appear method,
you ask to begin receiving
those remote control events.
And then you become the first responder.
Now this just makes you eligible to
receive these remote control events.
The system will decide
when to send them to you.
Typically,
that's when the user has pressed play
inside your UI and media starts playing.
Now, it's important to also
let the system know,
don't send them to me anymore.
So you do that by calling and
receiving remote control events
and resign first responder.
A very short example would be,
let's say I wrote a magazine
application where I can play
incidental videos from my site,
but when they're just reading
the magazine elsewhere,
you'd like the user to be
able to listen to their music
from their music application,
and you want them to control it.
So it's important to have the
right context and only be getting
these remote control events when
it's appropriate for your app.
So once you start getting
these remote control events,
what do you do with them?
Well, when you get the events,
you look at the type and subtype.
And there's a bunch of different
events that come to you,
including toggle, play, pause,
next track, previous track.
It's up to your application to
interpret those control events
appropriately for your app.
Now,
be careful and do something sensible.
Since these are control
events for the user,
you don't want them to be
confusing for your app.
Otherwise, they're just going to think
your app behaves strangely.
Now, once you've dealt with
controlling your media playback
app from the remote events,
you want to add multitasking
to round out the experience.
Now, with iOS 4, you've been able to play
audio in the background.
And of course,
playing audio in the background from
your app works great with AirPlay Audio.
With AirPlay Video,
you want to be able to play the video
in the background and let the user
multitask and do something else as well.
So what do you have to do?
We do the same thing that you do
from playing audio in the background.
You use Xcode, open your Info.plist.
Add a required background
modes key and then add the app
plays audio item to that key.
That flags your app as
being able to do that.
That's not quite the whole story.
You need to also use AV Audio Session.
AV Audio Session is a critical piece.
AV Audio Session lets you tell the
system what kind of audio you're playing.
And for the case of media playback,
you want to use the playback category.
This gets all the right behaviors
for the audio in your application.
Now, there's a whole host of things
you can do with IV Audio Session,
and it's a good idea to really
understand all those intricate details.
So I encourage you to check out
the Audio Session Management for
iOS session tomorrow.
So now that you've added
multitasking to your application,
you've combined all these three to
kind of round out the whole experience.
Now let's look at the lock screen.
So first of all, your phone's locked and
your audio's still playing.
That's because you've implemented
a background media playback.
The lock screen also has
that great album art.
That's because you use Now Playing Info.
And the user can control playback
using either the remote on the headset
or the controls in lock screen.
So I encourage you, if you're playing any
kind of media playback,
to support all these things together
and create a nice full rounded
experience for your application.
Next, we're going to talk about--
Video and getting some more out
of the AirPlay video experience.
We'll talk about some of the
different APIs available,
determining when best
to use AirPlay video,
Showing the user where the video
is playing and a few tips on
providing the best full playback
experience for the screen.
Now,
before we jump into which frameworks,
let's take a quick sideline
about the kind of content.
Media content, especially video content,
can come from many places.
AirPlay video works
well with local content,
content either from within your
app or from the asset library.
But it's also used for internet content,
things like progressive download
and HDTV live streaming.
Now,
HDTV live streaming is used for video
on demand as well as live events.
And with iOS 5, encrypted streams work
with AirPlay Video.
They work with AirPlay Video if
you've taken our recommendations
from the past to implement encrypted
streams the way we suggest.
So what are those recommendations?
It's all about getting the right key,
getting the keys to the system.
So either use custom URL protocols using
NSURL protocol to provide the keys,
or you can use HTTPS and session
cookies to provide keys to the system.
Now, later this afternoon,
there's a session on HDTV live streaming,
filling in all the changes
that are happening,
and some more details here as well.
I encourage you to go to that
session to find out all the latest.
Now about the APIs.
You've heard a lot about AV Foundation,
a powerful set of APIs and a framework
that lets you do lots of things.
You get a lot of control,
but it has no UI elements.
So you can totally write your
app on top of AV Foundation.
It's great.
If you want something a
little bit higher level,
you have another choice,
the media player framework.
The media player framework embodies the
expected behavior that we want the apps
to have in terms of media playback.
So that's a good place to look.
So when's the right time to allow
AirPlay Video to work for your
application and for your content?
If your application is
a media playback app,
it makes a lot of sense because you
want the full playback experience.
Like I said before,
the content is streamed
directly to the device.
No degradation in playback quality.
Works great.
But it's not always the right choice.
Imagine the user had just finished
watching their favorite TV show.
Display it on the big screen.
And then they go, play your video game,
and you have an intro movie.
You don't want your intro movie to show
up on the TV taking focus away from where
they're going to be playing the game.
The other case,
other than incidental videos,
is audio playback.
You don't want the AirPlay video
mode to be used when you're
playing audio-only content.
MP Movie Player Controller takes
care of this for you,
but when you're using
AV Foundation and AV Player,
you need to take care of that yourself.
Keep in mind that in iOS 5,
AirPlay Video is now allowed by default.
When we first released
AirPlay Video in iOS 4.3,
It was disabled for media player
framework and for web pages.
The application or the web page
designer had to explicitly enable it.
With iOS 5,
not only have we brought AirPlay video
to AV Foundation and UI WebView,
but it's now the default to be allowed.
So if you're delivering content or
applications to multiple iOS releases,
go ahead and be explicit.
Just use these APIs to set
the value that needs to be.
So how do you do that for applications?
It's pretty easy.
There's a couple of properties,
mostly named about the same,
allows AirPlay.
And you just set that to yes or no.
And UI WebView has media
playback allows AirPlay.
This basically allows...
web pages that enable AirPlay to
play inside the UI web view.
It's a little bit more
about the web pages.
There's two ways to enable
AirPlay video playback on a web page,
using the video tag and the embed tag.
For the video tag, it's xWebKitAirPlay.
You set that to allow or deny.
And for the embed tag, you use AirPlay,
and you set that to allow or deny.
So when you're using AirPlay video
and it is actually playing on the TV,
Make sure that your app
doesn't look broken.
You don't want the user to be sitting
there and be confused what's going on.
Instead,
you want to give them an indication
where to look to see their content.
So what do you have to do
with MPMoviePlayerController
to get that behavior?
Nothing.
It does it for you.
But for AV player,
you need to do some work yourself.
Like I said before,
there's no built-in UI.
There's no UI elements
inside AV Foundation.
Instead, you do this yourself.
You check the property
AirPlay Video Active,
and if AirPlay Video is active,
you display your helpful message.
And it's key value observable,
so you can listen for state changes.
Now let's talk a little bit
about the full screen experience.
Here's an example of an
application that uses inline video.
While you're playing the video,
you've got this additional content
that goes along with the video and
enhances the experience for the user.
Whether you're hooked up to a TV through
a wire or through an AirPlay screen,
it makes sense to mirror the whole
display because you want to watch
the video and see the other content.
Now, if the user clicks on
the full screen button,
you want to transition into a
mode where you take advantage
of the full screen of the TV,
either through
AirPlay Video, or using UI Screen APIs,
which we'll talk more about later.
So to achieve this with
MP Movie Player Controller,
it takes care of most of it for you,
but it needs one piece of information.
It needs to know that you
mean to be in full screen.
So you just set full screen,
and then the player
will do the right thing.
It's not okay just to
stretch the view to fit,
because then you're not going
to get the right behavior.
With AVPlayer,
you've got more work to do.
The application is responsible for taking
advantage of that external display.
So typically,
your application has a concept that
it wants to be in full screen or not.
When you're in AirPlay screen mode,
everything's being mirrored.
So you need to tell us that it's
okay to switch to AirPlay video.
So you set the use this
AirPlay video while AirPlay screen
active property to yes.
And this is harmless if
AirPlay screen is not active.
So go ahead and set it whenever
your app is in a full screen mode.
And then we'll just do
the right thing then.
Now in the wired case,
you need to do more work with
the UI screen APIs to get the
video on the second display.
So let's talk more about
using multiple displays.
Remember what I said before.
AirPlay Screen,
we use the same basic techniques
at the lowest level to implement
the mirroring and second display as
we did for wired displays through
the Apple Digital AV adapter.
That means the same APIs,
from your perspective, work.
And it's great for all apps.
Not just media playback apps.
And to tell you more about that,
I'd like to get Josh on the stage,
and he'll walk you through
all sorts of great stuff.
All right.
Thanks, Jim.
So now we're going to talk a little
bit more about how you can take
full advantage of these external
displays as a unique second display.
Everything that Jim's been talking
about so far is nice tweaks that you
can make to your existing applications
and the things you already have
in place to get great experiences
with the existing AirPlay video
and AirPlay audio technologies.
So now we'll look at using those
second displays as independent content.
So we're going to cover
a few things today.
First, we'll talk about mirroring your
content to the external display,
which, as Jim said,
is the default behavior.
If you do no other work,
this is what you'll get.
But then from there,
we'll talk about how you can use that
second display to display additional
content that is not the same as what's
showing up on the internal panel.
Once we've covered that,
there's two other sort of side
notes we're going to go into.
The first is overscan.
So if you've been around for, you know,
the last 30 years,
you've probably seen overscan
at some point and hoped that
it had gone away by now.
But it's here, so we'll talk about it.
And finally,
we're going to talk about screen modes,
which we'll get into later on,
how you can take advantage of different
modes available on the display.
So first off, what are we talking about
with this second display?
Well, we're not talking about this.
You may be used to Mac OS X.
Second display is an extended
desktop where you share content
across the displays and you can
bridge them with a single window.
That's not what we're
talking about on iOS.
On iOS,
the second display is a unique display.
It is controlled entirely
by the foreground app.
So while your application is frontmost,
you have full control over all content
that shows up on that secondary display.
No one else is going to run
and take over your screen.
You also have these two different modes,
the mirroring and the second display,
where you can display separate content.
So first off, this mirroring.
If you do nothing else, as I said,
this will happen automatically as soon
as you either plug in the hard cable
or your user picks AirPlay from the
route picker and turns on mirroring.
And anything you have displayed on your
internal panel will automatically get
mirrored out to that second display
exactly as you see it internally.
Now, of course, as you can see here,
this isn't necessarily ideal.
You're not using that entire screen
space that's available to you.
You've got this beautiful
16 by 9 display connected,
but we've got these big bars
down the side because our main
content is just taking up that
small amount in the middle.
So the nice thing, of course,
is that you don't have to do
any additional work to get this.
There is one thing that you
really do need to keep in mind
if you plan on using mirroring,
though, and that is to set your status
bar orientation appropriately.
Now, hopefully you already know this
and are doing it for other reasons.
For instance,
if you use keyboards in your application,
the orientation that the
keyboard comes up in will follow
the status bar orientation.
So if you have the wrong
status bar orientation,
it may come in upside down.
System alerts will appear in
the status bar orientation.
So there's many reasons that you
want to make sure this is right.
But for the purposes of AirPlay Screen,
your mirroring will be upside down if
you have your status bar orientation
right or possibly rotated sideways.
So if your user rotates the iPad and you
don't update the status bar orientation,
you're going to get that.
Probably not what you wanted.
But it's really easy to fix.
Just make sure you set the status bar
orientation to match whatever orientation
you're rendering your content in,
and it will just rotate right
around and be correct right side up.
no matter what orientation the
user is holding their iPad in.
So if you need to detect
that mirroring is happening,
for instance,
somewhere in your application you
decide you need to do something
slightly different in the case
where mirroring is occurring,
it's very easy with one line of code
to detect that this is happening.
Once you get your UI screen object,
which we'll look at in a little bit,
you can just send it the
mirrored screen message.
And if mirroring is occurring,
the object you get back from mirrored
screen will be UI screen main screen,
because mirroring always is
mirroring that main screen.
So one line of code,
easy to see if it's happening.
This is supported, of course, on iPad 2,
and it's supported with
a variety of cables,
including the Apple Digital AV adapter,
the Apple VGA adapter, and, of course,
now Apple TV.
So there's a number of different
technologies that you can have
connected with and still be
getting this mirroring experience.
They're all the same from the
purposes of your application.
All right, so that's mirroring.
Not a whole lot there.
Pretty easy to take advantage of.
But what if you want to really
take full advantage of that second
display and fill that full 16
by 9 bounds with that beautiful
content that you have in your app?
Well,
we want to do something more like this
and really take advantage of that screen.
This is pretty easy, too.
The one thing that I want to strongly
encourage you to do is avoid this.
If you're using second display
and displaying separate
content out to the panel,
don't leave your main iPad
or iPhone screen blank.
The worst thing you can do for
your user is have the iPad,
this beautiful device with a great
screen in their hands with nothing on it.
So make sure you keep something, some UI,
on the main screen as well.
So if you want to take advantage of this,
UIScreen is the API that you use to do
all your drawing to the external screen.
And the great thing about this is
that you already know how to do it.
Any content that you know how
to draw on the internal panel,
you can draw on the external screen
using all of the same APIs plus UIScreen.
So there's two main things you'll
have to do in order to make
use of UIScreen in this way.
The first is to detect the presence
of an external display so that
you know that it's time to try
and display content out there.
And the second then is to configure
that screen and place content on it.
So there's actually two places
where you'll want to detect
the presence of a screen.
The first is on application launch.
And as with most other things that
you would do on application launch,
you do this in the application
did finish launching method.
You just can check on your
application launch if there's
already a screen attached.
And you do that just by
counting the number of screens.
The first screen in the UIScreen screens
array will always be the main screen,
the internal panel.
So if there's more than one there,
the rest of them are external displays.
For the purposes of what
I'm looking at here,
we're going to simplify it and just
get the last screen out of that array.
You may want to look through the
array and see if there's one in
particular that you were interested in.
But I'm just going to
grab the last screen.
And I'll write in just a minute
this prepare screen method.
This isn't a system call.
It's one that we're going
to write in just a minute.
But we're going to use that same method
to detect both application launch
screens and screens that come later.
So the second case is
detecting display connections.
connections after your
application is already running.
And this is also really easy
using an NS notification,
UI screen did connect notification.
So probably also, when your application
did finish launching,
you would just register for this
notification and then you'll be
called back any time the user
plugs in a cable or connects to an
AirPlay screen through the route picker.
And again, once we've registered
for this notification,
we can call that same
prepare screen method,
and this time we'll get the UI screen
object out of the notification
because UIKit has passed the screen
object that was connected to you
as the object of the notification.
So in both cases,
we get the screen we want to display
on and call this prepare screen
method that we're about to write.
Now that method is pretty easy,
except you get to see it all at
once because my build didn't work.
There's basically three things
that we want to do here.
The first is we want to
get the screen's bounds.
We want to fill that entire
display with content.
So we want to get the screen bounds,
which is the outer size
of that entire display.
Then we'll create a new UI window
that fills that entire screen
bounds to make sure we fill the
entire area on that display.
The only other thing we have to
do then is move that screen to the
display to tell UIKit that we want
to be drawing to the external screen.
So we'll call window set screen
and pass in the screen that we
decided we want to display on.
Of course, there is one last thing,
which is setting the window's
hidden property to no,
because by default, windows,
when they're created, start out hidden.
So we've moved that window to the screen.
We've caused it to become
visible by setting hidden no.
And now you can use any of the
technologies you already know how
to use on your internal panel.
To draw content to the external panel.
So you can use OpenGL through
CAEAGL layer or any of the various
UIKit classes to get content out to
that screen exactly the same way you
would get it onto your internal screen.
So we've now written our app.
Everything's looking great.
We've got this beautiful game that we
wrote and we decide that we're going to
add some overlays on top of our content.
We want to add maybe some health
information for our player and a
couple of messages along the bottom.
So we just add those around the edges of
our game and everything's looking great.
We've also added some of our So this is
something that you will end up seeing
and have to deal with in some way.
But we've greatly
improved this situation.
In iOS 5.
So we'll get to that in just a second.
Of course,
what we want to do is inset that
content so that it doesn't get clipped.
Now we could do that by just
shrinking everything down.
But of course,
then we have these black bars around the
edges and I'll just highlight them in red
to make it more clear that they're there.
So our content no longer
fills the entire screen.
Ideally,
we would like to actually stretch
that background content out to
fill all the available pixels,
but still avoid clipping
the bits that are over top.
So UIKit has actually
been able to do that.
So we've added these new modes to
help you adapt to this UI screen
overscanned situation much easier
than was ever possible before.
So the new property is
UI screen overscan compensation.
And there are three possible
modes that you can set it to.
The default is UI screen
overscan compensation scale.
And then there's two more,
inset bounds and inset application frame.
So let's look at all three of these
and see what they're going to do.
Now the default, as I said, is scale.
And this is really great
for generic UIKit content.
Generally anything that isn't
particularly performance sensitive.
And what you'll get here,
and the reasons that you
might want to use this,
are you get a full frame buffer of
whatever size screen you're using.
So for the purposes of all these
examples we're about to walk through,
we'll assume that you're
connected to 720p displays.
Now the same things we're talking
about here would apply if you're
connected to a 1080p display with an
iPad 2 or even a 4:3 aspect ratio.
Like 1024 by 768.
So let's just assume 720p here
stands for whatever mode you're in.
So the nice thing about the
scale mode is that you still
have a 720p frame buffer to fill.
So from the perspective
of your application,
things are exactly the same
whether you're overscanning or not.
And you don't have to
change any of your code.
Then UIKit and CoreAnimation will make
sure that when you draw your content,
it just doesn't get clipped by scaling
it down and keeping it centered.
So there's no additional
work on your part.
Of course the downside of this is
that your content is being scaled.
And this scaling of your content
will introduce a performance
penalty which will lower the quality
of your content and reduce your
frame rate that you can render at.
So it's not ideal if you can spend
a little bit of additional time
working on your external display code.
We can use one of these other modes
and greatly improve the situation.
So let's look at inset bounds.
This is sort of the next step.
It's sort of the next step up in terms of
quality with minimal additional effort.
This is really good for high
performance UIKit content.
If you've got something that you
really are concerned about the
performance of and you want to
get the best possible quality,
you can switch to inset bounds.
Now what this is going to do
for you is give you a smaller
screen bounds to draw into.
So if you're again at that 720p mode,
you actually will not have the
full 1280 by 720 pixels to fill.
So this is going to allow
you to fill fewer pixels.
The result of that is that we won't
have to scale anything down in order
to avoid cropping your content.
So there will be no scaling
which will preserve that quality
and give you the best quality
rendering that you could get.
This will also give you that full
performance because you'll avoid the
additional scaling pass that the system
would otherwise have to go through to
scale your content down at every frame.
Now the downside of this is that you
have to do a little bit of extra work.
And because you have this
less than 720p frame buffer,
you can't really scale your content down.
So you have to make sure that
when you're drawing your content,
you're able to draw it at slightly
less standard resolutions.
In the case of 720p,
you'll probably have about 5 to 10% less
area than a full 720p frame to fill.
So you have to be able to draw at these
sort of resolution independent modes.
So let's go back to the first slide.
Now, if you can really spend a little
more time and go all the way,
the best you can get is
inset application frame.
Now, this is great for videos which are
already compensating for overscan or
for game content where you can just
make sure that you don't draw anything
that can't be clipped out to the edges.
So the nice thing here is that you
still get that full 720p frame buffer,
so you can actually fill all
of the pixels on the screen,
and some of them around
the edges will be clipped,
but you have access to every
pixel and can fill them all.
You'll get the full screen bounds so that
you know that you can fill everything.
And you'll get a smaller
application frame.
Now for those of you that are not
familiar with the UIScreen API yet,
there are two rects on
UIScreen that are interesting.
The first is the bounds,
which is that full area of the screen.
And the second is the application frame,
which is usually used to indicate the
area that you can safely draw your
content in without it getting clipped.
On the main screen,
the application frame is
inset to avoid the status bar.
On the external screen,
when you have inset
application frame chosen,
the application frame will be inset
to avoid clipping around the edges.
This is,
for those of you familiar with the term,
the content safe area.
And you can just,
we'll tell you where it is so you can
draw your extra content in there and
know that it will not get clipped.
The nice thing here is that
there's no scaling again because
you're filling the full bounds,
but you're allowing your content to
get clipped and just insetting anything
important into the application frame.
So you'll get full performance
and you'll get full quality.
The downside, of course,
is that you have to have a little bit
more ability to position different
parts of your content independent
of one another because you may have
to have those overlays positioned
inset from the outer bounds.
So there was kind of a lot there.
Let's just do a brief
recap of all of those.
In the case where you're connected to
a display that is not overscanning,
so we've detected that you're
connected to this display and the
display has told UIKit and the
system that it is displaying every
pixel and not overscanning it,
no matter which mode you have selected,
scale, inset bounds,
or inset application frame,
you will still have the full
720p buffer and all of them
will get displayed on screen.
So which mode you pick only has an
effect when we detect that the connected
display is actually overscanning.
Once we've detected that,
in the scale mode then, of course,
you'll fill the full 720p buffer
and it will be scaled down.
In the inset bounds mode,
you'll fill fewer than 720p.
And in the inset application frame case,
you'll fill 720p but draw important
things in that application frame.
So now we've got all of our content,
and we've tested on one display,
and everything's working great.
And maybe we haven't tried on a whole
lot of different connections yet and
a whole lot of different displays.
Well, there's a number of different ways
that your users may be connecting
their devices to their TVs.
For instance,
there's a variety of different
cables they might connect with.
There's a variety of iOS devices
they may be using in the first place.
And there are many different
TVs they may be connected to.
And when you have all these
different combinations of things,
there's a variety of different screen
modes that you may have available to you.
Now we're going to get into a
large number of things here,
and we're going to talk about a whole
lot of different modes you might see.
But just at a high level,
keep in mind that if you test a
4 by 3 mode and a 16 by 9 mode,
you've got yourself pretty well covered.
So let's say that we've got
this combination right here.
We've got an iPhone 4
with a digital AV adapter,
and we've got one TV that
we're testing with.
When we're using that,
maybe with doing nothing else,
we're getting 720p output
as our default mode.
But maybe our user is
actually using an iPad 2.
So instead of that,
they're getting 1080p.
They may also be using a different cable
or connected to a different screen,
so you might instead see 1024x768,
800x600, 640x480,
or possibly even if they're using
some of the older analog cables,
NTSC and PAL.
Now, as I mentioned,
there's a lot of stuff here,
but don't worry too much.
They're all going to
be either 4x3 or 16x9,
so if you've tested with both,
you're pretty well covered.
Even the NTSC and PAL resolutions, which,
as you maybe or maybe don't know,
are not square pixel,
are actually fixed in UIKit to be
square pixel display resolutions.
So when you get an NTSC or
PAL display connected,
as long as you're using a UI window
and putting it on that UI screen,
you'll either have a 640x480 bounds or an
854 or something like that by 480 bounds.
They'll either be 4x3 or 16x9.
So if you test those two,
you're in pretty good shape.
Now, with any one combination
of those devices,
iPhone or iPad or iPod Touch,
particular cable and particular display,
you will have one preferred
mode out of whatever large
available list of modes there are.
Now, there's no single preferred
mode for every combination,
but in any given combination,
there will be one preferred mode.
So let's say that in the
combination we've got,
720p is our preferred mode.
Now, preferred mode is... It's
actually an actual API thing.
It's not just something I'm
saying as we prefer this mode.
If you look on the UI screen API,
there's actually a property
called preferred mode.
And that may be 720p.
It may be 1080p.
It may be 1024x768.
Again,
it depends on what combination of device,
cable, and screen you're on.
But there will always be one that's
preferred for that given combination.
Now, the best advice that I can
give you about this is,
to the best of your ability,
use the preferred mode.
There's a variety of reasons for that.
The preferred mode, first of all,
is chosen automatically.
So if for no other reason,
you can be lazy and don't have to
do anything and you're gonna get it.
But there's actually
real good reasons too.
So there's no hardware mode switch
if you stick with the preferred mode.
When you tell a connected
display to change modes,
this can be a lengthy operation,
possibly even taking multiple seconds.
And there's often not real nice for
your users flashes of perhaps white
or different colors on the screen
while the mode switch is happening.
So sticking with the preferred mode
will avoid that hardware mode switch,
avoid the screen flashes,
and give you a seamless transition
between mirroring and second display.
Mirroring, the system mirroring mode,
will always be using the preferred mode.
So if when you switch from
mirroring to second display,
you stick with the preferred mode,
you can be sure that there
will be no display mode change.
change.
This will also give you faster launch
times or faster application transitions
from mirroring to second display.
A couple other things that
are nice about this is that it
gives you the best aspect ratio.
So if you're on a 16 by 9 display,
your preferred mode
will be a 16 by 9 mode.
And it gives you the best quality.
All of these LCD TVs that are out there,
they have a native resolution.
And very often, the native resolution,
when available, is the preferred mode.
So if you're using the preferred mode,
you're probably also avoiding an
extra pass through the TV scaler.
So you're preserving the best possible
quality for your users as well.
All right.
So if I haven't hammered that in enough,
there may actually be a case where
you might want to change modes.
So why would you do that?
Well,
The best example I can give of why
you might want to do this is if you're
writing a high-performance game and you
find that you simply can't render enough
pixels fast enough to fill a large mode.
So maybe you just can't
get your performance,
your frame rate up high enough at
1080p to stick with 1080p and you
really just want to always choose
720p instead when it's available.
So there's three ways that
you can address this problem.
The first is ignore that and do more
work and optimize your drawing code until
you get to an acceptable frame rate.
And so of course,
I strongly recommend that.
But, you know,
the benefit there is that you'll still
get to render at full resolution,
so you're going to get the best quality.
This will, of course,
also give you that optimal quality
and avoiding the mode switch.
The downside is that, well,
it's more work.
You have to do all this
extra performance tuning,
which hopefully you're doing anyway,
so maybe you've already done it all
and you just still can't get there.
And you're still possibly ending
up with lower performance on
these high-resolution displays.
So, if that doesn't work,
next option is to use the preferred
mode but render at a lower resolution.
Now, what I mean by that is,
say you're drawing OpenGL content.
Create your CA OpenGL layer at 720p size,
even if you're using a 1080p mode,
and then apply a scale transform to
the layer to scale that smaller render
buffer up to fill the full 1080p.
This allows you to render fewer numbers
of pixels and just adds that final
scaling pass to scale the rendered
pixels up to fill the entire frame.
This way, you'll stick with the benefits
of the preferred mode.
You won't have that hardware mode switch,
and you'll still be
avoiding the TV scalers.
You'll be using the built-in
high-quality scalers on the iOS device.
But the disadvantage is that
you're going to be using more
memory than is necessary.
You'll be allocating 1080p frame buffers,
even though you're really only trying
to display 720p worth of content.
So if that's not acceptable,
your final option then, of course,
is to actually change the mode.
And there is a list of available
modes on the UI screen object.
You can look through them,
find one you want,
and set it as the current mode.
The benefit will be that you can optimize
your performance for a known good mode.
So if you can't support 1080p,
you can optimize for 720p and
really get a great experience.
The downside, of course, then,
is that you're going to end up
with those hardware mode switches,
and you're going to require a
pass through the TV scaler because
changing the mode will require that
the TV scale your content down,
or up, rather, before it's displayed.
So with that in mind, though,
the last and most important
thing about modes is just don't
ask the user what mode to use.
This isn't Mac OS X with the system
preference pane launching and looking
at 20 different available modes.
Please, please,
please don't put a big mode selection
thing up there for your users to choose.
Test your app, see what you can support,
optimize for a particular
known good mode,
and then pick what's best for your app.
And make sure that you've really tested
it and know that it's a great experience.
Because leaving the experience up to
your end user is really just going
to result in bad reviews anyway,
so might as well pick
the right one for them.
So in summary,
just three important things that
I'd really like you to take away.
The first is always set that status bar
orientation if you're just mirroring,
because otherwise you're going
to end up sometimes with the
content upside down on the TV.
Second, adjust for overscan.
I know that we'd like to think
that overscan didn't exist anymore.
I know I would, but there it is.
So think about it and use these
new APIs to adjust for it.
And finally, use that preferred mode
if at all possible.
So with that in mind,
we're going to have Jacques come
up and give us a demo of
the AirPlay screen APIs.
Jacques Pepin: Thanks, Jacques.
Jacques Pepin: Okay.
Hi, everyone.
My name is Jacques-Philippe
Gasselin de Richebourg,
and I'm from FireMint.
I'm here to talk to you
today about external display
support in Real Racing 2 HD.
I'm going to first take you back a
little bit to our first racing game here,
Real Racing.
It was the first installment in
our Pro Circuit Racing franchise.
We got an Apple Design Award for
this last year,
and this was based on a
fixed-function rendering pipeline.
We've since updated this
quite substantially.
We have Real Racing 2 HD,
which I hope you've all played.
This was specifically
updated for the iPad 2,
and we really try to use the advanced
shader capabilities of the iPad
2 to do some fantastic effects.
We have per-pixel lighting,
anti-aliasing,
and reflections on the cars, for example.
Also,
the extra power of the iPad 2 allowed us
to put about 10 to 20 times more geometry
in than we had in the first installment.
There's also a very exciting
new feature of the iPad 2,
of course,
that you should all know about by now,
which is we have
external display support.
I'd like to walk over here and
show you a bit of a demo of this.
Okay, so we're starting the game
up here in connected mode.
So we're actually displaying
the two screens at once.
So I'm actually showing a bit
of a user interface right now
as the user has shown the video.
It was asking me to tap to continue,
which I did.
And it's also important,
I think Josh mentioned this earlier,
that you are always presenting user
interfaces on the iPad if you need
the user to interact with the iPad.
So you can see the game showing
there on the external display.
I just want to show you some of the
effects we were able to do here.
You can see a per pixel
lighting effect on the road,
a per pixel lighting
effect on the car as well,
and of course reflection there
of the scene that you're in.
I'm going to take you into a race here
and show you some of the other great
features of external display support.
You could actually detach the
cable right now and play this
in standalone mode as well,
and the game will switch.
And you can plug it back in again.
All right.
So...
The two screens allow you to
increase the level of immersion here.
And I'm going to go inside the car
here just to show you what I mean.
Now you see here, I'm turning the iPad 2.
You can see the arms and
the steering wheel turn.
This is actually increasing
my level of immersion because,
well, if I was facing that way normally,
my eyeballs would be on the screen,
right?
So I'm not actually
distracted by the iPad,
and I can really feel like I'm driving.
Now we also display extra information
about the race on the iPad 2,
just in case you are, you know,
maybe you're winning or something,
and you have some time to look
at where the opponents are.
I'm going to bring that up as soon
as I come around the corner here.
Okay, I'm going to show it to you now,
what I see on the iPad.
So you see this extra information here,
this race indicator, so where I am.
That's the orange dot,
and we have the gray dots.
That's the opponents.
You can also see the position,
where I am, the laps, the speed, and,
of course, the lap time.
So I'm going to bring it back in here.
- Right here.
And, yeah,
I guess I just want to leave it there.
I'll just tell you that, of course,
the API for this is very easy once
you've got the wired connections
going because the wireless mode,
as you saw yesterday,
works with exactly the same thing.
So you just want to make sure that
you are supporting the notifications.
That you're doing what
Josh told you to do?
OK, so some tips and tricks.
So follow Josh's advice.
Make sure that you register for
the notifications and that you
gracefully handle the display,
connect, and disconnect events.
Now AirPlay,
as you see the new feature here,
means that the user is going
to connect and disconnect
when your app isn't active.
You want to make sure that you
support that gracefully too.
With the two displays,
you're going to have
more screen real estate.
So you want to make sure that
you are drawing appropriate
content on each screen.
As you can see in our game,
we were showing the action content
up ahead where we were focusing
on the user having the attention.
And then we gave you some extra
information on the actual iPad.
So we gave the user more immersion
and more information because
we had more screen real estate.
Now an important part with a game
like ours is we're actually using
the iPad 2 as a steering wheel.
So you may get some orientation
notifications back and you need to make
sure that you're handling them properly.
The external display has to
obviously always be facing the
right way and you don't want to get
the embarrassing situation of that
turning as you turn the device.
Josh mentioned there are many different
devices that you are going to connect to.
You want to make sure that your game
is adequately prepared for this.
I said before that the
API is really easy,
and the hard part is making sure
that your game is actually up to it.
Test on a variety of displays.
They're going to have
different properties.
different aspect ratios,
different resolutions,
and you want to make sure that
you're scaling your content to it.
There's also a secondary
consideration there,
which is the impact on performance
or perhaps on the effects you
had prepared in your game.
You may have prepared an effect that's
perfect for a certain screen resolution,
let's say the iPad's internal display,
and that effect might not
work so well at 1080p perhaps.
So you might want to make sure
that you have a switchable effect
in there that looks great on
each and every configuration
that the user might connect to.
Okay, thank you very much.
Thanks, Jacques.
Now, we've given you a lot of
information about AirPlay today
and also Second Display,
but really encourage you
to go install the SDK.
Both your iPad and also your Apple TV.
And explore AirPlay.
Take a look at how AirPlay audio behaves,
AirPlay video behaves,
and AirPlay screen.
Make sure your app works well in
this environment because you want
to work well in this ecosystem.
Additionally,
we've given you a whole bunch
of new stuff to help you
make your apps even better,
especially in iOS 5.
Take advantage,
like the overscan compensation
that Josh mentioned,
the MP Now Playing Center info center to
really fill out your media playback apps.
And finally,
really look at taking advantage
of the second display.
The ability to add a second screen,
especially a large one,
can really change the experience.
For instance, people that know me
know I'm not a game guy.
Played Real Racing, you know,
just on the iPad, and that was fine.
That's nice.
But then you hook it up to a TV,
a big TV, and it just totally
changes the experience.
It's really immersive, and it's great.
And it's actually really fun to play,
even for me.
So think about that.
Take the opportunity
to look at your apps.
There might be some unique
things you can do in that space.
The ability to use a second
display to expand the experience
of your app for your users.
So for more information,
various people to contact,
Alan Shafer and Eric Verschen.
Customer-related sessions.
The first two,
Audio Development for Games and
Exploring AV Foundation,
have already occurred.
If you didn't check them out here,
check them out when you get back.
Coming up later today,
HTTP live streaming update.
There's also the Advanced HTML5
Media Controllers in Safari.
Talks about the web pages and the
various tags and how to use that.
Audio Session Management on iOS.
So you can find out all about
audio sessions and get the right
audio behavior from your apps.
And if you're writing games
or doing any kind of OpenGL,
check out Best Practices
for OpenGL ES apps for iOS.
You're going to get a whole
bunch of great tips there.
OK, that's it.
Thanks.
Thanks for coming.
Hope you enjoyed it.